README_tagpacks.md, before:

# GraphSense TagPacks

A TagPack is a collection of attribution tags, which associate cryptoasset addresses or GraphSense entities with real-world actors such as exchanges. 

TagPacks make use of the [INTERPOL Dark Web and Virtual Assets Taxonomy][dw-va] ([read on below](#using-concepts-from-public-taxonomies) for details on taxonomies) and can be validated and ingested into GraphSense using the  GraphSense TagPack Management Tool in this repository. 

An example for a public GraphSense repository containing TagPacks can be found [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpacks).

## More about TagPacks

### What is an attribution tag?

An attribution tag is any form of context information that can be attributed to a cryptoasset address.

The following example attributes a Bitcoin address to the Internet Archive, which is, according to [this source](https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/), the holder of that address:

    label: Internet Archive
    address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
    source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/



### What is a TagPack?

A TagPack defines a structure for collecting and packaging attribution tags with
additional provenance metadata (e.g., title, creator, etc.).

TagPacks are represented as [YAML][yaml] files, which can easily be created by
hand or exported automatically from other systems.

Here is a minimal TagPack example containing address tags with mandatory properties:

    
    title: First Address Tag Example
    creator: John Doe
    tags:
        - address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          label: Internet Archive
          source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/
          lastmod: 2019-03-15
          currency: BTC
        - address: 1BvBMSEYstWetqTFn5Au4m4GFg7xJaNVN2
          label: Example
          source: https://example.com
          lastmod: 2019-03-15
          currency: BTC



TagPacks can be shared among users using any communication channel (e.g., email).

They can also be managed using some Git-Service (Github in this case), which enables
version control and fine-grained recording of modifications, thus full provenance.

### Why are attribution tags important?

Cryptoasset analytics relies on two complementary techniques: **address
clustering**, which relies on heuristics to group multiple addresses into
maximal subsets that can likely be assigned to the same real-world actor,
and **attribution tags** as shown above. The strength lies in the combination
of these techniques: a tag attributed to a single address belonging to a larger
cluster can easily add contextual information to hundreds of thousands
cryptocurrency addresses.

**Note**: certain types of transactions (e.g., CoinJoins, Mixing Services) can
distort clustering results and lead to false, unreliable, or intentionally
misplaced attribution tags that could associate unrelated actors with a given
cluster.

### TagPack properties

A TagPack defines a **header** with several mandatory and optional fields
and a **body** containing a list of tags. In the above example, `title` and
`creator` are part of the TagPack header; the list of `tags` represents the body.

Please note that allowed properties are defined in the TagPack schema, which
defines **mandatory** and **optional** fields for the TagPack header and body.
In the above example, `label`, `address`, and `source` are mandatory properties
as they describe where a certain piece of information is coming from (either
in the form of a URI or a textual description).

The properties are defined [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/blob/develop/tagpack/conf/tagpack_schema.yaml). 
The definition looks as follows:

    header:
      title:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      creator:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      owner:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      description:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      is_public:
        type: boolean
        mandatory: false
      tags:
        type: list
        mandatory: true
    tag:
      label:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      source:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      currency:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      context:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      confidence:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      is_cluster_definer:
        type: boolean
        mandatory: false
      created:
        type: datetime
        mandatory: false
      lastmod:
        type: datetime
        mandatory: false
      category:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
        taxonomy: entity
      abuse:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
        taxonomy: abuse
      address:
        type: text
        mandatory: true

The `source` should provide a backlink to the websource where the tag information originates, e.g. https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/.  If no backlink is to be provided (e.g. for private TagPacks), the field can contain other informative text.

For `currency`, use the corresponding currency codes such as: `BCH, BTC, ETH, LTC, ZEC`.

For `confidence` values read on [below](#attribution-tag-confidence-score).

The `context` property contains any additional information associated with the tag, in JSON format, e.g.

    context: '{"count": 42, "verified_by": "operator", "flags": ["scam", "misuse"]}'

### Property inheritance

In the above example, the same `lastmod` and `currency` property values are
repeated for both tags, which represents an unnecessary repetition of the same
information.

To avoid repeating field values shared by all tags, one can add body fields to the header, and they will be automatically be applied to all tags in the body. 
Thus, they are *abstracted* into the header and then inherited by all body elements.
An example is given below where the `currency` and `lastmod` fields are abstracted into the heade:

    
    title: Second TagPack Example
    creator: John Doe
    lastmod: 2019-03-15
    currency: BTC
    tags:
        - label: Internet Archive
          address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/
        - label: Example
          address: 1BvBMSEYstWetqTFn5Au4m4GFg7xJaNVN2
          source: https://example.com

### Property override

It is also possible to override abstracted fields in the body. This could be
relevant if someone creates a TagPacks comprising several tags and then adds
additional tags later on, which then, of course, have different `lastmod`
property values.

The following example shows several tags associating addresses from various
cryptocurrencies with the label `Internet Archive`. Most of them were collected
at the same time (2019-03-15), except the Zcash tag that was collected and
added later (2019-03-20).

    
    title: Third TagPack Example
    creator: John Doe
    description: A collection of tags commonly used for demonstrating GraphSense features
    lastmod: 2019-03-15
    label: Internet Archive
    source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency
    category: organization
    tags:
        - address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          currency: BTC
        - address: 1K1rgZ1dz9w7dsR1HGS1drmzfUHMtqx1Tc
          currency: BCH
        - address: "0xFA8E3920daF271daB92Be9B87d9998DDd94FEF08"
          currency: ETH
        - address: rGeyCsqc6vKXuyTGF39WJxmTRemoV3c97h
          currency: XRP
        - address: t1ZmpK4QFcvyQZ3ghTgSboBW8b4HgiZHQF9
          currency: ZEC
          lastmod: 2019-04-16

### Identification and Uniqueness of TagPacks and Tags

TagPacks are uniquely identified by a URI.

Since TagPacks are files pushed to some Git repository, they can be
uniquely identified by their Git URI
(e.g., `https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpacks/blob/master/packs/demo.yaml`).

Within a TagPack, tags are treated as **first-class objects** that are
identified by the combination of the mandatory body fields `address`, `label`,
`source`.

That implies that the same label (e.g., `Internet Archive`) can be assigned
several times to the same address (e.g., `1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN`),
typically by different parties.

### Using Concepts from Public Taxonomies

The use of common terminology is essential for data sharing and establishing
interoperability across tools. Therefore, the TagPack schema defines two
properties that take concepts from agreed-upon taxonomies as values:

* `category`: defines the type of real-world entity that is in control of a
given address. Possible concepts (e.g., exchange, marketplace) are defined in
the [INTERPOL Darkweb and Cryptoassets Entity Taxonomy][dw-va-entity].

* `abuse`: if an address was involved in some abusive behavior, this property's
value defines the type of abuse and can take values from the
[INTERPOL Darkweb and Cryptoassets Abuse Taxonomy][dw-va-abuse].

Both `category` and `abuse` properties are optional, and can be also combined, e.g.

    category: organization
    abuse: extremism 

The "narrower" (more specific) concept should always be preferred over the "broader" (more abstract) concept in  the taxonomy hierarchy, 
e.g. using `ico_wallet` should be preferred over `wallet_service`.

### Attribution Tag confidence score

Attribution tags originate from distinct sources, which have various confidence levels. E.g., Bitcoin addresses retrieved via a Web crawl are less trustworthy than a Bitcoin address with proven private key ownership. 

The TagPack creator can choose an id from the list of confidence score ids available [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/blob/develop/tagpack/conf/confidence.csv), e.g. 
    
    confidence: ownership

### Mapping Address Tags to Clusters

An attribution tag assigned to an address could or could not apply to the entire cluster. 
This decision depends very much on the context of a TagPack, must be decided on an individual basis, and must be flagged using the specific field ``is_cluster_definer``, which can be ``true`` or ``false``.

As a rule-of-thumb, we consider the following generic aspects when doing the mapping.

  1. If an address maps to a cluster that already carries a tag with higher confidence, then the address tag does not define the cluster, i.e., `is_cluster_definer: false`.

  2. If an address maps to a cluster of size 1, then the address tag also defines the entity, i.e., `is_cluster_definer: true`

  3. If an address is not a service address (e.g., exchange) and maps to a large unknown cluster, then it might be some form of custodial wallet, ie., `is_cluster_definer: true`

One can finally end up with several address tags, which are mapped to a single cluster and carry the flat `is_cluster_definer: true`. In such cases, we select the one with the higher
`confidence` value. In case of conflicts, address tags mappings must be revised as part of an attribution tag curation workflow.


### Header inclusion

If a lot of tagpacks share common header properties, a `header.yaml` can be created to avoid repetitive data in each tagpack file.

A simple example:

    home
        user
            tagpack_provider
                 header.yaml
                 2021
                     01
                         tp_20200101.yaml
                         ..
                     02
                          tp_20200201.yaml


The `header.yaml` file contains all the shared fields:


    title: BadHack TagPack
    creator: GraphSense Team
    description: Addresses used for BadHack
    confidence: forensic
    abuse: scam
    currency: BTC
    label: BadHack


and each tagpack file (e.g. `tp_20200101.yaml`) includes the header file:

    header: !include header.yaml
    tags:
         - address: bc1qxy2kgdygjrsqtzq2n0yrf2493p83kkfjhx0wlh
           context: '{"validated": true}'

The directory structure can be arbitrarily deep. The syntax is always the same:

    header: !include header.yaml


#### Header file location resolution

The tagpack tool resolves the header file as follows:
 starting from the directory given on the command line, it traverses the parent directories, i.e. upwards, until the `header.yaml` is found.

For the directories structure example given above, starting with `/home/user/tagpack_provider/2021/01`
the header file is detected in `/home/user/tagpack_provider/`
    

### TagPack Repository Configuration

TagPacks are stored in some Git repository - a so-called **TagPack Repository**.

Each TagPack repository must have a file `config.yaml`, which defines pointers to used taxonomies.

    taxonomies:
      entity: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/entities.csv
      abuse: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/abuses.csv

[dw-va]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/
[dw-va-abuse]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/abuses.csv
[dw-va-entity]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/entities.csv
[tagpack-tool]: https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool
[yaml]: https://yaml.org/

Commit message:

Fix bug #24
dynamic backlink url generation now works for single file und multi-file insertion.

README_tagpacks.md, after:

# GraphSense TagPacks

A TagPack is a collection of attribution tags, which associate cryptoasset addresses or GraphSense entities with real-world actors such as exchanges. 

TagPacks make use of the [INTERPOL Dark Web and Virtual Assets Taxonomy][dw-va] ([read on below](#using-concepts-from-public-taxonomies) for details on taxonomies) and can be validated and ingested into GraphSense using the  GraphSense TagPack Management Tool in this repository. 

An example for a public GraphSense repository containing TagPacks can be found [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpacks).

## More about TagPacks

### What is an attribution tag?

An attribution tag is any form of context information that can be attributed to a cryptoasset address.

The following example attributes a Bitcoin address to the Internet Archive, which is, according to [this source](https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/), the holder of that address:

    label: Internet Archive
    address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
    source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/



### What is a TagPack?

A TagPack defines a structure for collecting and packaging attribution tags with
additional provenance metadata (e.g., title, creator, etc.).

TagPacks are represented as [YAML][yaml] files, which can easily be created by
hand or exported automatically from other systems.

Here is a minimal TagPack example containing address tags with mandatory properties:

    
    title: First Address Tag Example
    creator: John Doe
    tags:
        - address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          label: Internet Archive
          source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/
          lastmod: 2019-03-15
          currency: BTC
        - address: 1BvBMSEYstWetqTFn5Au4m4GFg7xJaNVN2
          label: Example
          source: https://example.com
          lastmod: 2019-03-15
          currency: BTC



TagPacks can be shared among users using any communication channel (e.g., email).

They can also be managed using some Git-Service (Github in this case), which enables
version control and fine-grained recording of modifications, thus full provenance.

### Why are attribution tags important?

Cryptoasset analytics relies on two complementary techniques: **address
clustering**, which relies on heuristics to group multiple addresses into
maximal subsets that can likely be assigned to the same real-world actor,
and **attribution tags** as shown above. The strength lies in the combination
of these techniques: a tag attributed to a single address belonging to a larger
cluster can easily add contextual information to hundreds of thousands
cryptocurrency addresses.

**Note**: certain types of transactions (e.g., CoinJoins, Mixing Services) can
distort clustering results and lead to false, unreliable, or intentionally
misplaced attribution tags that could associate unrelated actors with a given
cluster.

### TagPack properties

A TagPack defines a **header** with several mandatory and optional fields
and a **body** containing a list of tags. In the above example, `title` and
`creator` are part of the TagPack header; the list of `tags` represents the body.

Please note that allowed properties are defined in the TagPack schema, which
defines **mandatory** and **optional** fields for the TagPack header and body.
In the above example, `label`, `address`, and `source` are mandatory properties
as they describe where a certain piece of information is coming from (either
in the form of a URI or a textual description).

The properties are defined [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/blob/develop/tagpack/conf/tagpack_schema.yaml). 
The definition looks as follows:

    header:
      title:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      creator:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      owner:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      description:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      is_public:
        type: boolean
        mandatory: false
      tags:
        type: list
        mandatory: true
    tag:
      label:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      source:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      currency:
        type: text
        mandatory: true
      context:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      confidence:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
      is_cluster_definer:
        type: boolean
        mandatory: false
      created:
        type: datetime
        mandatory: false
      lastmod:
        type: datetime
        mandatory: false
      category:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
        taxonomy: entity
      abuse:
        type: text
        mandatory: false
        taxonomy: abuse
      address:
        type: text
        mandatory: true

The `source` should provide a backlink to the websource where the tag information originates, e.g. https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/.  If no backlink is to be provided (e.g. for private TagPacks), the field can contain other informative text.

For `currency`, use the corresponding currency codes such as: `BCH, BTC, ETH, LTC, ZEC`.

For `confidence` values read on [below](#attribution-tag-confidence-score).

The `context` property contains any additional information associated with the tag, in JSON format, e.g.

    context: '{"count": 42, "verified_by": "operator", "flags": ["scam", "misuse"]}'

### Property inheritance

In the above example, the same `lastmod` and `currency` property values are
repeated for both tags, which represents an unnecessary repetition of the same
information.

To avoid repeating field values shared by all tags, one can add body fields to the header, and they will be automatically be applied to all tags in the body. 
Thus, they are *abstracted* into the header and then inherited by all body elements.
An example is given below where the `currency` and `lastmod` fields are abstracted into the heade:

    
    title: Second TagPack Example
    creator: John Doe
    lastmod: 2019-03-15
    currency: BTC
    tags:
        - label: Internet Archive
          address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency/
        - label: Example
          address: 1BvBMSEYstWetqTFn5Au4m4GFg7xJaNVN2
          source: https://example.com

### Property override

It is also possible to override abstracted fields in the body. This could be
relevant if someone creates a TagPacks comprising several tags and then adds
additional tags later on, which then, of course, have different `lastmod`
property values.

The following example shows several tags associating addresses from various
cryptocurrencies with the label `Internet Archive`. Most of them were collected
at the same time (2019-03-15), except the Zcash tag that was collected and
added later (2019-03-20).

    
    title: Third TagPack Example
    creator: John Doe
    description: A collection of tags commonly used for demonstrating GraphSense features
    lastmod: 2019-03-15
    label: Internet Archive
    source: https://archive.org/donate/cryptocurrency
    category: organization
    tags:
        - address: 1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN
          currency: BTC
        - address: 1K1rgZ1dz9w7dsR1HGS1drmzfUHMtqx1Tc
          currency: BCH
        - address: "0xFA8E3920daF271daB92Be9B87d9998DDd94FEF08"
          currency: ETH
        - address: rGeyCsqc6vKXuyTGF39WJxmTRemoV3c97h
          currency: XRP
        - address: t1ZmpK4QFcvyQZ3ghTgSboBW8b4HgiZHQF9
          currency: ZEC
          lastmod: 2019-04-16

### Identification and Uniqueness of TagPacks and Tags

TagPacks are uniquely identified by a URI.

Since TagPacks are files pushed to some Git repository, they can be
uniquely identified by their Git URI
(e.g., `https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpacks/blob/master/packs/demo.yaml`).

Within a TagPack, tags are treated as **first-class objects** that are
identified by the combination of the mandatory body fields `address`, `label`,
`source`.

That implies that the same label (e.g., `Internet Archive`) can be assigned
several times to the same address (e.g., `1Archive1n2C579dMsAu3iC6tWzuQJz8dN`),
typically by different parties.

### Using Concepts from Public Taxonomies

The use of common terminology is essential for data sharing and establishing
interoperability across tools. Therefore, the TagPack schema defines two
properties that take concepts from agreed-upon taxonomies as values:

* `category`: defines the type of real-world entity that is in control of a
given address. Possible concepts (e.g., exchange, marketplace) are defined in
the [INTERPOL Darkweb and Cryptoassets Entity Taxonomy][dw-va-entity].

* `abuse`: if an address was involved in some abusive behavior, this property's
value defines the type of abuse and can take values from the
[INTERPOL Darkweb and Cryptoassets Abuse Taxonomy][dw-va-abuse].

Both `category` and `abuse` properties are optional, and can be also combined, e.g.

    category: organization
    abuse: extremism 

The "narrower" (more specific) concept should always be preferred over the "broader" (more abstract) concept in  the taxonomy hierarchy, 
e.g. using `ico_wallet` should be preferred over `wallet_service`.

### Attribution Tag confidence score

Attribution tags originate from distinct sources, which have various confidence levels. E.g., Bitcoin addresses retrieved via a Web crawl are less trustworthy than a Bitcoin address with proven private key ownership. 

The TagPack creator can choose an id from the list of confidence score ids available [here](https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/blob/develop/tagpack/conf/confidence.csv), e.g. 
    
    confidence: ownership

### Mapping Address Tags to Clusters

An attribution tag assigned to an address could or could not apply to the entire cluster. 
This decision depends very much on the context of a TagPack, must be decided on an individual basis, and must be flagged using the specific field ``is_cluster_definer``, which can be ``true`` or ``false``.

As a rule-of-thumb, we consider the following generic aspects when doing the mapping.

  1. If an address maps to a cluster that already carries a tag with higher confidence, then the address tag does not define the cluster, i.e., `is_cluster_definer: false`.

  2. If an address maps to a cluster of size 1, then the address tag also defines the entity, i.e., `is_cluster_definer: true`

  3. If an address is not a service address (e.g., exchange) and maps to a large unknown cluster, then it might be some form of custodial wallet, ie., `is_cluster_definer: true`

One can finally end up with several address tags, which are mapped to a single cluster and carry the flat `is_cluster_definer: true`. In such cases, we select the one with the higher
`confidence` value. In case of conflicts, address tags mappings must be revised as part of an attribution tag curation workflow.


### Header inclusion

If a lot of tagpacks share common header properties, a `header.yaml` can be created to avoid repetitive data in each tagpack file.

A simple example:

    home
        user
            tagpack_provider
                 header.yaml
                 2021
                     01
                         tp_20200101.yaml
                         ..
                     02
                          tp_20200201.yaml


The `header.yaml` file contains all the shared fields:


    title: BadHack TagPack
    creator: GraphSense Team
    description: Addresses used for BadHack
    confidence: forensic
    abuse: scam
    currency: BTC
    label: BadHack


and each tagpack file (e.g. `tp_20200101.yaml`) includes the header file:

    header: !include header.yaml
    tags:
         - address: bc1qxy2kgdygjrsqtzq2n0yrf2493p83kkfjhx0wlh
           context: '{"validated": true}'

The directory structure can be arbitrarily deep. The syntax is always the same:

    header: !include header.yaml


#### Header file location resolution

The tagpack tool resolves the header file as follows:
 starting from the directory given on the command line, it traverses the parent directories, i.e. upwards, until the `header.yaml` is found.

For the directories structure example given above, starting with `/home/user/tagpack_provider/2021/01`
the header file is detected in `/home/user/tagpack_provider/`
    

### TagPack Repository Configuration

#### Versioning with git

TagPacks are stored in a Git repository - a so-called **TagPack Repository**.

When inserting tagpacks into a **TagStore database**, this git repository information will be used to provide the backlink to the remote repository, e.g.:

    tagstore=# select id,uri from tagpack ;
          id               |                                                                   uri                                                                   
     -----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     testpacks:20210101.yaml         | https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/tree/develop/tests/testfiles/yaml_inclusion/2021/01/20210101.yaml
     testpacks:20210106-special.yaml | https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool/tree/develop/tests/testfiles/yaml_inclusion/2021/01/special/20210106-special.yaml

Currently having a single remote is supported. 


#### Taxonomy configuration

Each TagPack repository must have a file `config.yaml`, which defines pointers to used taxonomies.

    taxonomies:
      entity: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/entities.csv
      abuse: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/abuses.csv

[dw-va]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/
[dw-va-abuse]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/abuses.csv
[dw-va-entity]: https://graphsense.github.io/DW-VA-Taxonomy/assets/data/entities.csv
[tagpack-tool]: https://github.com/graphsense/graphsense-tagpack-tool
[yaml]: https://yaml.org/
